The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Time Snatcher, by Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Time Snatcher

Author: Randall Garrett

Release Date: June 22, 2021 [eBook #65671]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TIME SNATCHER ***




             Tampering with events of the past could bring
             disastrous results in the future. It was why
             Brek was given a pair of six-guns to catch--

                           THE TIME SNATCHER

                          By Randall Garrett

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Imagination Stories of Science and Fantasy
                             February 1957
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


"We're in a hell of a jam, Brek," the Councillor said. "If Sagginer
isn't stopped, he'll change history. The situation's desperate."

Time Patrolman Brek Halliday nodded in agreement. It _was_ a tense
situation. Time travel, he knew, was possible only so long as the
traveller into the past did nothing that would change history
significantly; the time-stream itself would straighten out little
changes in the past so that overall history would remain the same.

But a big change was something else again. If you stick your finger in
a river, there are a few ripples around it, but the flow of the river
remains the same. If you build a dam, though....

"_When_ is he?" Brek asked. "Do we know?"

"Fortunately, yes. He forced one of our operators to use one of the
chronokinetic projectors, and then kidnapped her and took her with him.
But he didn't know that the power drain was measurable and had been
recorded on the meters. We know how much energy he used, so we know how
far into the past he went. We've got him pinpointed in the area of the
old United States, somewhere between 1880 and 1895."

"Who was the girl he kidnapped?" Brek asked.

The Councillor smiled apologetically. "Dori Clayton."

The muscles of Halliday's jaw tightened. "I see," he said stiffly.
"When do I leave?"

"We'll prepare you immediately. It's going to be a touchy job to get
both of them out of there, so watch yourself."

"Don't worry," Halliday said quietly. "I'll manage it." He walked out,
eyes hot with rage, thinking of Dori in Sagginer's clutches. His hands
slowly clenched and unclenched as he headed down the long hall.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Time Patrolman's first step in any excursion to the past is to learn
the language and the history so well that he can pass as a native. For
three days, Brek Halliday lay in the padded tank of a hypnorobot while
information was poured into him.

Then he was given his clothes. They consisted of a pair of high-heeled
boots made of treated animal skin, a pair of tight trousers woven
of blue-dyed vegetable fiber, a shirt of similar material, and a
broad-brimmed hat. Other clothing and equipment went into a pack, and
a money-belt around Brek's waist carried gold coins that not even an
expert could have told from the originals.

The thing that Brek liked best was the fact that he would be allowed to
carry weapons openly. Some civilizations of the past didn't permit a
citizen to carry guns, but where Brek was going, a man with a pair of
six-guns at his hips wouldn't look odd at all.

Brek had ridden a horse three times--once in the Battle of Agincourt,
once at Chickamaugua, and once during a trip from Rome to Ravenna in
the Sixth Century. His fourth horse was saddled a little differently,
but he found it easy to handle. He trotted it onto the platform and
signalled the operator. There was a brief hum as the chronokinetic
projector warmed up. Then there was a sudden surge of power.

Brek's surroundings seemed to vanish into greyness.

Moments later, light swirled around him....

       *       *       *       *       *

Plata City, New Mexico, was enjoying a warm, lazy summer day. No one
paid much attention to the stranger who came into town on a very
ordinary-looking cayuse, pulled up before the Casa Loma Saloon, and
dismounted. He hitched his horse to the rail, looked up and down the
street casually, and then strode into the saloon.

"What'll it be, mister?" asked the fat, mustachioed bartender.

"Whiskey," Brek said. "And a little cold beer to follow it. That road
from El Paso is hot."

The barman filled the order. "El Paso, eh? That's a right smart ride.
Been on the road long?"

"'Bout a week. I don't believe in rushin' nothin'."

"Hey, barkeep!" yelled someone down at the far end. The bartender went,
and Brek downed his whiskey. He sipped the beer reflectively, thinking
long and hard.

Jon Sagginer had been convicted once for illegal use of a time machine,
and had been sentenced to ten years on Luna. Somehow, he'd managed to
escape and, by bluff and daring, actually get control of a Time Patrol
Chronokinetic Projector long enough to use it and kidnap the operator,
Dori Clayton.

It was bad enough to use the machine, Brek thought darkly, but to take
Dori--

Brek clenched his fists. For kidnapping Dori, Sagginer would take his
punishment from Brek, not the law.

The first thing to do was find him. Reading the power flow of a
Chronokinetic Projector could only give an approximate location.
Sagginer had landed within fifty miles of this spot, and at some time
within the past five years--but where was he now?

And, Brek asked himself--did he still have Dori with him? _Five years
is a long time._

In the course of a year or two, Sagginer could be a long way from Plata
City, but Brek had a hunch that this was his goal. He didn't know he
could be traced, and he wasn't prepared for travel.

But--

Suddenly, a finger tapped his shoulder and he whirled in surprise. He
saw a man wearing a big silver star prominently on his vest.

"Stranger, you'll have to shuck them irons. City ordinance says a man
can't carry pistols inside the city limits."

"I notice I ain't the only one with a full gunbelt," Brek said slowly.

The man's eyes narrowed. "Them happens to be John Sager's men, mister,
and they all happen to be deputies." His pistol came out suddenly. "I'm
orderin' you to take 'em off."

Brek shrugged and unbuckled the belt.

"I ain't lookin' for an argument," he said, handing the gunbelt to the
sheriff. But as the sheriff reached for the belt, Brek lashed out with
one hand, slapping the other's weapon aside. It skittered across the
floor as Brek jerked one of his own guns from the belt and sent the
sheriff reeling backward with a blow in the chest.

Several of the other armed men started to reach for their hips, but
Brek's icy voice stopped them short. "First man to touch a gun gets
lead!"

The sheriff's face grew red. "You've got trouble, stranger."

"Maybe. But them guns is mine."

"You're trying to buck the law," said the sheriff.

Brek grinned. "It's a damn fool law that needs so many men to enforce
it. If you was the only one packin' irons, I might be persuaded to
gie 'em to the barkeep here. But as long as everybody is carryin'
full holsters, I reckon I don't want to be out of style. I'd look too
conspicuous."

Still holding his weapon, he buckled on his belt and walked over to
where the sheriff's gun had fallen. Without taking his eyes off of
anyone in the room, he squatted and picked it up.

Then he walked back to the sheriff and shoved the six-gun into the
lawman's holster. "Don't aim to cause no trouble, sheriff. If you and
the rest of these gents will oblige me, I'll ask the barkeep to set us
all up a drink."

There was a moment of silence, then the sheriff grinned.

"Reckon I'll take whiskey," he said.

Brek grinned back and put his weapon in its sheath.

It was almost a mistake. As soon as his hand was well away from the gun
butt, one of the men at the bar snatched at his six-gun and brought it
up to fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

No ordinary man with ordinary guns could have moved fast enough to
do anything. But Brek was no ordinary man, and his weapons were far
from ordinary; both man and guns were the product of a science far in
advance of the nineteenth century.

Brek's hands blurred, and his weapons seemed to leap from their
holsters as the little robot mechanisms secreted in their butts
responded to the electroneural commands of their owner.

There was a roar of sound as one of the guns spoke.

The gunman's weapon seemed to vanish from his hand. It sailed across
the room, banged against the wall, and dropped to the floor. Brek had
no compunction against killing a man, particularly in self-defense,
but the death of one man might conceivably make radical changes in the
future.

As the echoes of the gunshot died away, the gunman howled with pain.
The shock of Brek's bullet against the gun had sent needles of pain
racing up his arm.

The room was silent. Then the sheriff walked over to the gunman, who
was massaging his aching, numbed fingers, and grabbed him by the shirt
collar.

He said softly, "When I agree to take a drink with a man, I don't take
it lightly when one of my deputies tries to shoot him."

"I figured you wanted to take him after what he had done," the man said
sullenly.

"If I had, I'd of done my own gunslinging." He reached out and yanked
the small metal star off the man's vest. "You ain't a deputy any more.
If I catch you wearin' guns, I'll run you in--or shoot you, whichever's
handiest."

Still holding his injured hand, the man turned and walked out of the
saloon. The sheriff turned around to Brek.

"That was mighty fast and accurate shootin', son. What'd you say your
name was?"

"I didn't say yet," Brek said, reholstering his weapons. "But as a
matter of fact, it's Ed Calhoun. As I said, I don't want to cause no
trouble, but I'm glad to oblige them that comes lookin' for it." He
laid a ten-dollar gold piece on the bar. "Here's an eagle, barkeep.
Let's have them drinks."

One of the other men at the bar looked quizzically at the sheriff.
"Sheriff, maybe you hadn't ought to of done that to Cactus. How's the
boss gonna take it?"

The sheriff looked at him for a moment. Then he looked at the others.
"Let's get one thing straight here. John Sager's an important man
hereabouts, and I don't deny it. He needs good gunslingers to guard his
property, and I'm only too glad to deputize 'em. But, by the Almighty,
if a man don't behave himself, if he ain't to be trusted with a gun,
then he ain't goin' to wear a badge as long as I'm sheriff."

He turned to Brek. "I got to uphold the law, son. I asked you to turn
them guns in and you wouldn't do it. I'm damned if I'm goin' to' try
to take 'em away, so there's only one thing to do." He handed Brek the
star that he had taken from Cactus. "Hold up your right hand," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Half an hour later, Brek found himself sitting at a table, drinking
beer and talking with the sheriff and a man named Chuck. He'd answered
questions about his past with the purely fictitious data that he'd
received from the hypnorobot, but all the time his mind had been on the
man who was "an important man hereabouts"--John Sager.

_Sager. Sagginer._ It could be the same man.

"By the way, Sheriff--who _is_ John Sager?"

"Owns the bank," the sheriff said. "Got property up on Chloride Flats,
too. That's the silver mine district, you know. Bought out a couple of
men who was failin' in business and then put 'em to work managin' their
own stores for him. People around here have a right smart respect for
him."

"Friendly sort of fella, eh?"

"Well, I wouldn't go so far as to say that. He treats people well,
gives money to the church and the school, gives a man a job if he's
down and out, but I wouldn't say he was a likeable man personally."

"He's odd," said Chuck. "A real queer one. Maybe I shouldn't say it
because I work for him, and he's done real proper by me, but--well,
he's a funny one."

Brek raised an eyebrow. "Yeah--How?"

"Well, for one thing, he seems so--well, _cold_. Like he was a
side-winder or a rattlesnake waitin' for a packrat to come by. He
always seems to be figurin'--calculatin'. He don't smile much, and when
he does, it don't look right on him."

"That funny accent of his don't help none," the sheriff chimed in. "It
ain't that he can't speak good English, but it sounds funny, the way he
says it."

"Been here very long?" Brek asked casually.

"'Bout three years, is all. Done right well by himself, considerin' he
didn't have much when he came."

Chuck said: "After bein' robbed and all, it's a caution how he done so
well." Then he laughed. "That was downright funny, when you come to
think of it."

"Yeah," the sheriff said, grinning. "Him and his sister showed up one
night, naked as jaybirds. A couple of owlhoots had robbed 'em and
stripped 'em of everything they had. No horse, no clothes, no nothin'.
He was lucky, in a way, though. He had a money-belt on him that he
managed to hide in a mesquite bush while the bandits wasn't lookin'.

"I was sittin' in my office that night, when I heard a knock at the
back door. I opened it, and there was John Sager, all dressed up in his
birthday suit and nothin' more. Course, I didn't know who he was--"

Brek listened closely to the sheriff's story. It all fits in. Sagginer
hadn't had time to prepare himself for this era; his speech was
strange, and his clothes even stranger. So he'd taken off his clothes
and pretended to have been robbed. And his sister?

"What's his sister like?" he asked.

"Pretty," Chuck said, "but she's not too bright. Goes around in a daze
most of the time."

_Hypnotized!_ Brek thought. That settled it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-four hours later, Brek had all the information he needed.

Sagginer had a double plot in mind--one which would both set him up
permanently and at the same time eliminate any danger from the Time
Patrol. Sagginer knew, of course, where the Great Silver Vein was
at Chloride Flats. It wasn't due to be discovered until 1973, but if
"Sager" found it, he'd not only be a rich man--he would so change
history that the Time Patrol would be unable to reach him. He would
divert the time-stream radically by the discovery of such a vast amount
of silver.

Brek had presumably spent the night at the Murray Hotel, but he had
actually slipped out of his room unseen and made an excursion on foot
up Palo Alto Mountain to the big house Sager had erected there.

It was tightly guarded. There would be no chance of getting in there
without creating a major disturbance. Cautiously, he crept completely
around the house, looking for a break in the guard network. There
wasn't any.

In order to get inside, he'd have to get himself invited in. But how?

He returned to the Hotel, headed from there to the Casa Loma, and was
sitting in the bar drinking a beer, mulling the problem over, when
Chuck came in.

"Ed," the slim man said softly, "it really ain't none of my business,
but I thought you ought to know that Cactus is gunnin' for you."

"Thanks, Chuck," Brek said, as Chuck walked over to the other end of
the bar, as if not wanting to be seen with Brek.

It was easy to see what had happened. Cactus had told Sager-Sagginer
what had happened in the bar yesterday, including, no doubt, the story
about the blinding draw from the hip. Sager probably suspected that
Brek was a Time Patrolman and had sent Cactus to shoot him.

Brek moistened his lips, got up, and dropped a coin on the bar. Then
he tipped his hat to Chuck and pushed his way through the batwings,
heading for Sager's bank.

He knew the game. Sager didn't care whether Cactus got killed or not;
what he wanted to do was watch Brek's gunwork, which would give him
away as a Patrolman if he depended on the robot pistols.

Brek would have to take a chance.

He reached down and turned off the robot armament. All he had now was
a pair of ordinary pistols. Overhead, the noonday sun was coming down
strong and hard, and he began to sweat.

Casually, he sauntered down the wide, unpaved street toward the bank.
There were a few people strolling idly in the other direction. He moved
up against the row of shops, looking in all directions.

No sign of Cactus. He frowned. Brek knew of Cactus' fear of his
lightning draw, and suspected that Cactus would try an ambush. Brek
glanced uneasily across the street, over at Bishop's Livery, where a
cowpoke was hitching his reins to the rail. It wasn't Cactus.

Then, suddenly, a gun spoke. Brek felt a hot bolt of lead blast its way
into his arm, and he staggered dizzily. He glanced up as he struggled
to regain his balance, and saw gunsmoke drifting out an open window in
the second floor of Sager's Bank. _Cactus_, he thought. He leaped back
as another bullet raked the dirt near him. His left arm was warm with
his own blood.

The street was silent. Brek leaned against the cool glass of a shop
window, waiting, holding his breath.

In a few minutes, a head peered cautiously out the second-story window.
Brek tugged at his gun--it seemed to take forever to get it out with
the robot armament shut off--and fired once.

A man tumbled out the window, bounced off the awning in front of the
building, and dropped heavily to the ground. He lay still.

Brek mopped the blood from his arm. His head was starting to swim with
pain, and new worries assailed him. He had killed a man, now. Would it
change the past? Would he ever reach Dori again? He didn't know. All he
knew was the blinding pain in his arm.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was in fairly good repair an hour later, though the arm still
throbbed a bit. He'd taken it to a local doctor; Sagginer would
be suspicious if he'd used Quik-Heal on it. He stood in front of
the Murray Hotel, methodically packing his few belongings into his
saddlebags.

Chuck walked up. "Ed, the boss would like to see you. Sager."

"Sager? What does _he_ want?"

"Wants to apologize for what Cactus done. He fired Cactus as soon as
he heard about the run-in with the sheriff, so he wants you to know he
ain't responsible. Cactus had no business layin' for you from that bank
window."

Brek shrugged. "Might as well go," he said. "I never figured Sager was
behind it anyway."

He headed to the bank. Sager was sitting behind his desk, flanked by a
couple of his gunmen. He was a lean, long-nosed man with cold eyes and
a narrow, thin-lipped mouth.

"You are Ed Calhoun?"

Brek nodded.

"I want you to know that I am sorry for what my ex-employee did. I do
not like that sort of thing." Sager's speech was stiff and formal, Brek
noted.

"I figured he was on his own," he said easily. "I didn't know of
nothin' you might have against me."

"There is nothing, I assure you. I understand you are leaving Plata
City."

"Yep. I'm headin' for Arizona--cattle country. I'm a cowman by trade."

"You are also a very good man with a gun. I need men like you. How
would you like to work for me?"

_It had worked_, Brek thought exultantly. Pretending to be about to
leave town had removed all suspicion from Sagginer's mind.

"Why, I reckon I might stay if the pay was good," Brek said
thoughtfully. "Long as a man makes a livin', it don't matter much
_what_ he does."

"I will make it well worth your while, Mr. Calhoun."

Brek drew his breath in sharply, fighting the temptation to shoot Sager
where he sat. It would eradicate one considerable blotch on the human
race, but it would also involve killing others and it still wouldn't
get Dori out of that house.

"Reckon I'll listen to your proposition, anyhow, Mr. Sager."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was three days before Brek was asked up to the house. He knew his
time was running low. If Sager actually started mining operations on
his property, his death or disappearance wouldn't stop it. Someone
else would find the Great Silver Vein, and the time-stream would be
unalterably diverted, causing incalculable change in the world of the
future.

Brek's opening was a lucky one--a prowler had been caught, a Mexican
itinerant shot and killed by a guard. It had apparently scared Sager,
who probably suspected the Mexican might have been a Time Patrolman,
and so he had decided to increase the guard around his house. Brek was
called from his bank duties and taken up Palo Alto Mountain to the
Sager mansion. His job was to patrol the grounds.

That evening, as dusk fell, Brek strolled around the grounds, going
from one of the posted guards to another.

"Sam? It's me, Ed."

"Howdy, Ed. Seen anything?"

"Not a thing. You?"

"Nope. I think the boss is just jumpy."

Brek poured tobacco into a cigarette paper, rolled it deftly, and put
it in his mouth. "Got a light, Sam?"

"Sure."

As the guard struck the match, Brek leaned forward to light his
cigarette--and, at the same time, he put his hand on the other's
shoulder. Automatically, a little device in his palm silently and
painlessly injected hypnotene into the man's blood stream.

After a moment, Brek said: "How do you feel, Sam?"

Sam blinked slowly. "Just fine."

"You'll do anything I tell you--won't you, Sam?"

"Why sure, Ed. Whatever you say."

Brek grinned savagely. "You won't hear any noise from the house."

"No noise from the house," Sam agreed.

"No matter what happens, you won't hear anything out of the ordinary,
or see anything out of the ordinary. This will seem just like any other
night to you."

Under the influence of the drug, Sam nodded in agreement.

"And you won't remember what I just said. All you'll remember is that I
bummed a light and went on."

Again Sam nodded.

"Well, so long, Sam."

"So long, Ed," said Sam tonelessly.

The same process, with variations, was repeated with the rest of the
guards. When he was finished, Brek fired his gun into the air and
strode boldly up to the front door. He rapped.

"Who is there?" asked a voice from within.

"Ed Calhoun, Boss. We just killed another prowler. You want to take a
look at him?"

A pause. Then, "Are you sure he is dead?"

"Bullet through his head," Brek said.

"What does he look like?"

"Ordinary. Might be an Indian."

The door opened, and Sager stepped straight into a right upper-cut
which bowled him back through the opening. Brek charged in after him,
but the man lay limp, his eyes closed.

Brek stood over him for a moment, debating what to do. Then he heard
footsteps on the stairway.

_Dori._

She stared at him, no recognition in her eyes. A chill of horror ran
through him as he saw what Dori had become.

"Who are you?" Her voice was dull, uncaring.

He walked over to her and looked at her eyes. Burning fury rose in him.
Using hypnotene, Sagginer had made Dori only the shell of the girl he
had loved.

"Who are you?" she asked again. "I do not know you."

"You once did," he said tightly. "You--"

He felt a sudden blow on the back of his neck, and his knees sagged.
Sager had been feigning unconsciousness, and now had returned to the
struggle at a moment when Brek was unprepared.

A fist smashed into his side, and he ducked away, blinking away
the pain. He turned and advanced toward Sagginer, while Dori moaned
wordlessly in the corner.

Sagginer jumped forward and drove a fist toward Brek's jaw, but Brek
countered and felt knuckles crash through the time-jumper's teeth.
As Sagginer rocked, Brek hit him below the heart, and he grunted and
folded up.

This time Brek made sure of the job. He continued pummelling Sagginer's
senseless body until he was out of breath, then stood up and looked at
Dori.

She was huddled helplessly in a chair, sobbing in terror. Brek scowled
as he remembered the girl he had once known, and gave the unconscious
form of Sagginer another kick. Then he slid his gun out of its holster
and pressed a button on the underside of the robot gunbelt.

The time-scoop closed around the three of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the greyness cleared away, Brek stumbled out of the time-scoop and
saw the Councillor waiting for him, smiling.

He shook his head to clear it. "Here I am," he said. "And here's your
time snatcher. Mission accomplished, sir."

"Very fine job, Brek. Very fine."

Brek looked at the Councillor. "There's one problem, though. The girl,
Dori--"

He saw the Councillor blink apprehensively. "Oh, I brought her back,
all right," he said quickly. "But--but--she's been badly treated, sir.
I don't know if the damage Sagginer's done to her mind can ever be
repaired. I--"

The Councillor's eyes widened. "What are you talking about, Brek? What
has happened to Dori? I'm afraid I don't understand what you mean."

"Why, she's right here--unconscious, in the back of the Time-Scoop,"
Brek said, puzzled. "And--" He turned to find the girl. "Why--she
_isn't_ here!"

"Of course not," said the Councillor. "She's been right here, all the
time. Where else should she be?"

Dimly, Brek began to realize what had happened. Some act of his--the
shooting of Cactus, perhaps--had altered the future, his present, ever
so slightly. Just enough so that in _this_ present, Sagginer had gone
back alone--_without_ Dori.

A door opened, and a girl stepped out, clad in a white lab smock. Her
eyes were bright and clear, and when she saw Brek, she gave a little
scream of joy.

Then Brek folded her into his arms.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TIME SNATCHER ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.